Hello everyone. Welcome to a new episode of The
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs, and
today I'm joined by Caitlin Bailey. She's a sex
worker rights advocate, a comedian, a writer, the host
of the, the oldest profession podcast, and today we're
going to talk about some of the history and
misconceptions that people have about sex workers. So, Caitlin,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for having me. I really
appreciate being here.
OK, so we say that prostitution is the oldest
profession in the world, right? So how old is
it actually, and how can we know that? I
mean, do we look at archaeology, anthropology, or what?
Uh,
ARCHAEOLOGISTS will absolutely quibble with you on this. I
believe that midwifery is probably the oldest profession. We
would not have made it past the Homo erectus
stage as a species without very skilled, uh, midwives,
um, but sex work or the exchange of erotic
services or sex for something of value pre. Dates
us as a species and is certainly older than
money. Uh, MONKEYS do this, penguins do this, other
species of birds do this, um, and there's a
lot of evidence to suggest that our, uh, our
ancestors did this.
Yeah, no, that's very interesting because just earlier this
year I interviewed Nathan Lentz. He published the book
The Sexual Evolution. He's an evolutionary biologist and that
at a certain point we talked about transactional sex
in other species, and I guess that some of
these conservative people would just think, oh my God,
it's outrageous. Come on, you're having transactional sex. That
might be nat that can be natural, right?
Yes, it's uh. It's as natural as hunting.
So, uh, what are the oldest depictions of, uh,
prostitution or other kinds of sexual practices in human
history?
So, I make the argument that uh sex for
meat is probably the first exchange. We have one
of the most, excuse me, forgive me, it is
6 a.m. here. Um. And I, uh, I performed
last night, so I'm still, still acclimating to, to
talking.
You could, you could have told me, and we
would, we would have scheduled the interview
later. I, you're absolutely right, and, uh, and also
I just, I wanted to, I wanted to do
this. So thank you very much for being flexible.
This was a. Self-inflicted, um, scheduling snafu, but I,
uh, I scheduled this when I was on the
East Coast, so it would have been a 9
a.m. interview, which was a much more reasonable endeavor
and now I am on the West Coast, uh,
and with the time change and, uh, you know,
it's, yeah, uh. So your question is like what
are some of the examples of like the earliest,
uh, earliest exchanges of prostitution, um, so before written
history, right, before we have any cultural evidence of
like organized or formal prostitution. I think that there's
a lot of physiological evidence to suggest that sex
for meat is probably one of the first exchanges.
We have one of the most dramatic menses of
any species. If any other animal bled the way
that we do, they'd pass out and die in
the wilderness. They could not handle it. And so
because of this, people with uteruses spent a huge
chunk of our history walking around in an almost
constant state of iron deficiency. And so there's a
lot of incentives around, you know, women who, uh,
sometimes have children or sometimes bleeding or like trying
to entice or cajole or bully or bribe. Men
to go and kill things for us and so
I think that there are probably a lot of
old rituals, a lot of ancient religious practices, um,
and also certainly examples of either solo or organized
prostitution, all in the interest of getting men to
bring women meat, um, fast forward. Tens if not
hundreds of thousands of years, I think some of
the earliest temples, sort of ubiquitously right on every
continent feature fertility goddesses, often eroticized fertility goddesses, and
there's a lot of examples that temple prostitution is
a pretty common practice that you see throughout the
world, right? Worshippers coming. Having sexual experiences with, uh,
you know, priestesses that are channel, channeling, you know,
various, uh, iterations, various deities, um, in exchange for
something of value, the way that you might leave,
um, you know, an offering at a church or
a temple today, what relationship this has to sort
of like brothels. Prostitution or like how that evolves.
We know that they come together, um, certainly in
biblical times, there's a lot of like switching back
and forth between like temple prostitution and tavern prostitution,
but um, I believe, um, and I'm biased on
this and I'm probably stretching past, uh, you know,
the archaeological evidence. But I think that priestess, prostitutes
built the foundations of civilization. I think it was
us that gave people a reason to come together
without killing one another, that domesticated plants and animals,
that invented scripts, that tamed fire, that created a
lot of the rituals that allowed people to gather
and create what we would recognize as culture.
But wait a minute, you mentioned eroticized temple goddesses,
so are you saying that there were forms of
pornography thousands and thousands and thousands of years ago?
Yes.
Oh, OK, so it's not, uh, it was not
invented by capitalism.
No, no, it certainly wasn't invented by the internet.
So it's, yeah, I think as soon as we
started scratching things into walls, uh, depicting each other's
bodies, uh, doing sexy things was one of the
first things that we did, whether that was art,
whether that was religion, whether that was sex work,
whether there are clear lines between all of those
things is for other people to decide.
So there were, there were public depictions of sexual
practices.
Absolutely, yes, 100%. Yeah, and you know, they say
there's a, there's an old joke, the difference between
pornography and erotica is like about 20 years. And
so I don't know what it is when it's
20,000 years.
But, OK, look, but since you are a, yeah,
since you are a sex worker rights advocate, what
is a sex worker? I mean, what do you
define, uh, how do you define a sex worker?
So I define sex worker very broadly in part
because I am an activist and so I think,
you know, having a big tent, having a broad
coalition is really important. And so anyone who's engaging
in any kind of eroticized labor, um, sex work
is a broad umbrella term. Refers to people doing
both criminalized, uh, you know, full service in-person exchange,
whether that's happening, you know, like on the street
or in cars or in hotel rooms or brothels
or massage parlors, but it also refers to people
who are doing like touchless performances, right, whether that's
peep show or uh OnlyFans or porn star, uh,
forms of like dominatrix or like BDSM work um.
I think it also includes like phone sex operators,
foot fetish models, people that sell their panties that
have never shown their face, uh, you know, people
engaged in a wide variety of things that people
outside of the exchange might not recognize as erotic
but are. You know, there's a woman I know
who has a client who likes to be tickled
by feathers. He pays her hundreds of dollars an
hour for that exchange. They know it's sexual. Good
luck prosecuting that. You know, uh, I want to
include Hooters waitresses. So, you know, there's a very
broad and I would say fortunately, unfortunately slippery kind
of relationship and like the word whore has become
or has always been a sort of flexible category
that stretches to include, uh, you know, women with
opinions. So sex work. Um, IT'S also a similarly
broad category, um, of folks, a wide variety of
people doing a wide variety of things for a
wide variety of reasons.
But do you think that when advocating for sex
workers it's important to distinguish between the different types
of sex work with their own peculiarities or it's
not necessary?
I think that, you know, the devil's in the
details in terms of like policy specifics and the,
you know, the political or, you know, advocacy. Needs
of strippers who are working at a brick and
mortar establishment and OnlyFans models and you know in
person in-service workers are different, but the uniting factor
is that we all face the same stigma and
we all, we should all stand together to support
each other fighting for a safer, healthier, uh, more
just future for all of us.
And, and in terms of how you approach sex
work, do you have a feminist approach to it
or
not? I identify as a feminist. Um, I believe
that sex workers were the first feminists. We were
certainly in spaces that feminists spent a long time
fighting to get into, uh, long before, uh, feminists
were invited into them. Um, BUT I don't, I
don't know if there's a distinction between like feminist
advocates and anti-feminist advocates within the sex work, you
know, like I think that laws that help just
like that, I think that the distinction between, like
there is a distinction of course between like adult
consensual sex workers and victims of human trafficking.
Sure, we're going to talk about that,
yeah, yes. And also the decriminalization of sex work
helps both sex workers and survivors of prostitution. And
so, you know, I think it's important for sex
worker rights advocates to include people that identify as
survivors of prostitution that do not identify as adult
consensual sex workers that hate the phrase sex work
in our coalition, right, in our uh in our
community. Um, SO I don't really know what the
distinction would be, but like I'm a feminist. Most
sex worker rights advocates I know are feminists, but
I also know a lot of feminists that fight
against our work. So, yeah.
Yes, that that's actually what I was going to
ask you because there are these sort of more
sex negative feminists, uh, gender critical feminists, and, and
even, I mean, people who are not necessarily feminists
but more conservative people who have this sort of
more moralistic and patronizing approaches to sex work. So
what do you make of them, particularly when they
identify as feminists?
Sure, I mean this is, uh, this is part
of the feminist movement that, you know, in the
US at least goes back to the Seneca Falls
Convention of 1840. You know, Elizabeth Cady Stanton, who
was the first, you know, feminist woman to suggest
that women have the right to vote. Convened what
we would recognize as sort of like the modern,
you know, like feminist movement, and her and Susan
B. Anthony wrote Victoria Woodhull, who was the first
woman to run for president, the first woman to
address Congress on the issue of suffrage, the first
woman to open up, you know, her own brokerage
firm. Out of our history because she was a
sex worker and so there was an interest among
the Elizabeth Cady Stanton's and Susan B. Anthony's of
the world to distinguish themselves from notorious women, women
with bad reputations, uh, women. Victoria Woodhull because they
didn't want to tarnish the emergent feminist movement of,
you know, upper class white, often married women who
thought, many of whom thought that like asking for
the right to vote was too radical. They were
asking for things like. You know, property rights, the
right for, you know, women to maintain property even
in marriage. So it's, it's interesting to think about.
And then of course that tension continues into what
we recognize as the porn wars in the 1970s
and like luminaries with brilliant women like Gloria Steinem
end up spending huge amounts of their advocacy energy.
Trying to eradicate the oldest profession and criminalize pornography
in the name of creating, you know, a safer
space for women. Women like, you know, Andrea Dworin
or Catherine McKinnon genuinely believe that we should be
fighting porn rather than fighting for access to contraception
or abortion rights. And of course, you know, we
live in a porn saturated world and we. Lost
access to safe and legal abortion in half of
the US, so, you know, I believe that my
feminist foremothers were wrong about where they should be
spending their energy, and I think that this tension
within the feminist movement is kind of a fatal
flaw that has, uh, I don't know, I don't
know how academic how academic it is. It's very
early in the morning if I cuss on this
podcast.
Um, uh, uh, YEAH, I guess it depends on
the word, the specific word, because this will, I
mean, this will be on YouTube, but anyway, yeah,
well, you know, maybe you can beep it or
whatever, but it, it's really, I mean, it, it's
fucked us, like, you know, from the beginning, women
have spent too much time fighting other women trying
to police our own sexual choices rather than finding
and fighting for shared ground. Because like sex workers
and anti-sex feminists want a lot of the same
things.
Yeah, and I find it very interesting er when
those kinds of attitudes come from feminists particularly, but
because shouldn't feminists be in favor of women er
consensually having sex, whether it's sold or not, whether
it's for money or not, er I I mean
and making their own sexual choices.
Right, and I think that like, you know, smart
people can disagree about the corrupting influence of like
money or capitalism or the economy or, you know,
what it means to commodify oneself or, you know,
like the soul eroding work. Of turning yourself into
a brand, but that's as true of YouTubers as
it is for OnlyFans models. And when we sort
of separate out erotic labor, sexual labor, I think
we blind ourselves to the shared like labor conversation
that we can be having. Um, YOU know, again,
I, I spend a lot of my time talking
about how we can and should stand together against
exploitation, but when prostitution becomes a symbol of exploitation,
we end up directing our energies at all of
the wrong things, and we are not going to
get to a safer, healthier, more gender equitable future
by trying to like erase tits from the internet.
I mean, I get the sense, please correct me
if I'm wrong because you're probably much more into
feminism than I am. I mean, I also identify
as a feminist, but you probably know much more
than I do about it, but I get the
sense that many of these feminist women that position.
Themselves against sex work or specific kinds of sex
work that uh I mean they're sort of moralizing
attitudes that they have towards sex workers stem a
lot from their attitudes about sex more broadly.
Yeah, and I think that it's important. To contextualize
that and understand that a lot of people, including
feminists, are coming to this conversation having experienced sexual
trauma and so, you know, I, I know that
that's true and, and, you know, like Andrea Dorkin
writes openly about this, but there are a lot
of feminist thinkers who are informed by their own
personal experience and you know it's difficult once somebody's
experienced that kind of, of, of trauma, not. To
universalize it. And so I do have deep empathy
for people, you know, especially like, you know, the,
the browbeaten wives of the early 19th century, right,
with like, you know, drunk husbands having no legal
recourse, like coming home, spending all of the family
money on brothels and bars, beating their families, you
know, I understand how a sex negative attitude could
emerge from those conditions.
Yeah, but, but I mean, but we have to
take that into account and they are probably not
considering, uh, how sex workers themselves experience sex work,
right, and I think that there is, you know,
sort of like. Catastrophicizing that could happen or again,
like, you know, imposing your own experience on, onto
others and like, you know, charity, charities in general
have this kind of like dark underbelly history of
people imposing their own fantasies. Or narratives on the
people that they may think that they're trying to
help, but you can't help people that you can't
hear. So if you're not listening to their own
experiences, if you're not open, uh, you know, coming
to the table with curiosity and empathy, but rather
the sort of like moralizing tone, it's very easy
to do violence, uh, even in the name of
charity and Christian Concern.
Yeah, that's actually why I'm doing this series that
I call humanizing sex workers on my channel and
podcast, because I actually think that people should try
to talk with sex workers themselves instead of assuming
the kinds of experiences they have.
And that's the secret, right? Uh, YOU know, it's
easy to, um, you know, hold all kinds of
crazy ideas. About people you've never met, right? You
know, we saw this with the LGBTQ plus movement,
right? Like a lot of stigma and shame is
made possible in a world before people realize they
already know and love a gay person. And so
we just need to work towards a future where
people realize that they already know and probably really
like a sex worker in their lives.
Um, HOW do you look at, uh, stigma surrounding
sex work in society nowadays? Do you think that
sex work is still as stigmatized as it was
a few decades ago or perhaps a little bit
less?
It's interesting. I feel like I am, I'm starting
to, uh, I'm, I'm almost 40. And I feel
like in my relatively short life, I've watched the
pendulum swing both ways. Growing up, I feel like
we were moving towards a more accepting future. And
within the last, like, I don't know, 5 to
7, maybe 10 years. I've seen kind of a
complicated swing back, um, and part of that is,
is visibility, right? Like the trans community experienced this,
right? Like visibility does not necessarily lead to more
rights. So OnlyFans, the ubiquity of porn on the
internet, uh, conversations that we're, you know, like having
around like sex and culture and sex negative culture.
Like you see this next generation coming up with
a lot of like very retro kind of like
reactionary um ideas that I recognize from my, my
grandfather about like purity, culture, um, or, you know,
like sex negative, um, you know, and I'm like
talking to young people, I'm like, I don't think
you know what you're asking for. Like you want
less, you want more censorship in in movies? What
is like, what, what, what is, what, what is
this coming from? Um, AND also sex workers have
never been more active. Belgium just became the first
country in Europe to decriminalize sex work. There are
more sex workers having conversations with legislators as constituents
than at any other point in human history. So
there's a lot of reason for hope and there's
a lot of reason for caution, and the history
has always been complicated, uh, and the, you know,
the modern moment is no exception.
Yes, actually, you know, I, I thought because I
have um conflicting thoughts about it because on the
one hand, I look at, for example, the fact
that nowadays, um, sex workers are, and porn stars,
for example, are on social media and people follow
them more or less openly and, and some of
them get celebrated publicly, but at the same time,
I mean, for example, just recently. Recently on X
slash Twitter, uh, prostitutes, uh, from Nevada got their
accounts banned, suspended, and, uh, not only that, but
also just recently I released an interview on my
channel with Nina Hartley, and we have a fantastic
conversation about pornography and, uh, feminism and so on,
and, uh, I, I thought that for example. Uh,
THINGS like the MILF category in porn would be
contributing to fighting against ageism in porn, uh, and,
uh, interracial sex without fighting against racism, but actually
she educated me on the fact that probably it's
not really like that, that we are contributing to
the fetishization of certain people.
Yeah, absolutely, and I think that part of that
is a part of the creator culture in general,
right? You know, I think what's happening to porn
stars or OnlyFans stars is a very similar thing
that's happening to TikTok stars or influencers is that
we're kind of flattening ourselves for the for the
algorithm, um, and so, you know, we all live
in these kind of media silos and sex workers'
media silos are more. Siloed, um,
yeah. Yeah, so I mean, let me, uh, run
through you some of the most common claims made
by people who are against sex workers, not just
the sex negative feminists, but also the more conservative
type of people. Uh, YOU'VE already mentioned this briefly
earlier, but they claim that sex work is always
exploitative. So what do you reply to that?
I mean, sex work is work and maybe work
is always exploitative, but it's no more, there's more
trafficking and more overt exploitation in agriculture and fishing
and mining and domestic labor than there is in
porn or prostitution. That's, and that's just. Stone cold
fact, right? That's not, that's not me spitballing. That's
according to like the US Department of Labor Statistics,
right? That's according to the World Health Department, Amnesty
International, uh, you know, these, there's empirical evidence to
suggest that there is, there is not more traffic.
Like trafficking is not overrepresented in. Sex work, it
is overrepresented amongst vulnerable populations. Now the criminalization of
sex work does lead to more vulnerabilities, which leads
to more exploitation, but there's nothing inherently exploitative about
erotic labor.
Yeah, uh uh uh we're going to come back
to that bit about criminalization because I want to
ask you specifically what you think is the best
legal and political approach to sex work, but we're
going to get there. I, I was just, I
was just going to say that it's interesting when
people talk about, for example, sex trafficking, and they
use that to make the claim that because they're
sex trafficking, then. Uh, PROSTITUTION and sex work more
generally should be abolished, should be banned, but they
don't make the same argument when there's trafficking in
the case of a of
agriculture reconstruction
and so
clothing, your iPhone, I mean like we live in
a deeply extractive exploitative economy. There's absolutely examples of,
you know, horrific violence, but if the presence of
exploitation is enough to abolish. Industries then like we've
got to get rid of industry and so I
don't see people giving up fast fashion. I don't
see people giving up, you know, the food that
they eat. I don't see people giving up um
other examples of like more obvious harm. Um, IT'S
just easier for them uh to try to judge
and shame, um, and make life harder for sex
workers again in the name of charity and concern.
And it's Yeah, I, I
actually, I actually think that this kind of attitude
towards sex work and then connecting sex trafficking to
it has much more to do with people's own
moral values than with simply the legal aspects of
it.
Yeah, I mean people just can't imagine. Themselves doing
this work and so they fight to make it
impossible for other people to do this work, but
they don't do that with soldiers or people that
work in slaughterhouses or people that work in mines.
There are a lot of industries that are horrific
for people's mind, body, and soul. Sex work is
not in the top 10.
Yeah, and I guess they also don't give up
construction even though if you go to Qatar or
Dubai, there's lots of slaves working there in construction.
So, so, uh, I mean, and, and the other,
another kind of argument that they have is that.
Sex work is never a choice that people are
always cursed into it.
Uh, WHAT do you say it just doesn't matter
how many sex workers stand up and say I
made a choice, uh, like, you know, any, I
mean, we've written books, like we've, we've done seminars.
There's so many of us. I travel the world
performing and meeting other. Adult consensual sex workers, people
who chose this work, people who felt called to
this work, and so it's interesting, you know, when
you're talking to ideologues that believe this stuff, you're
either too privileged to be representative, or people are
speaking for you, so. You know, because your experience
does not align with their trauma porn fantasy, they
say you're not representative, and it doesn't seem to
matter how many of us non-representative sex workers there
are.
Yeah, it's very interesting. Back in uh last year
actually, I interviewed Gerald Mosley. He wrote this book
Sex Workers and Their Clients in Their Own Words,
and he basically collected, uh, statements from different sex
workers tackling each of the claims made by abolitionists
and, uh, at a certain point there he, um,
basically quoted someone, I can't remember her exact name,
but she was. Referring to uh feminists trying to
represent sex workers, and she was pissed off and
saying, I don't want these feminists representing me because
they don't, they know nothing about my experiences in
sex work and so they just want to ban
it, prohibit it, abolish it, and they, they know
nothing about it, so they, I don't want them
representing me.
Yeah, absolutely. It's, it's ridiculous to me how many
people are out there trying to speak for people.
Who have written books.
So, uh, also another kind of claim that they
make is that sex work tend to be associated
with poverty and the lack of other employment opportunities.
So what do you make of that?
I mean, sure, but again, if you're listing industries
where, you know, poor folks are overrepresented, sex work
is not in the top 10, you know, I
don't see folks calling to abolish domestic labor even
though there are not a lot. Of like middle
class college educated people, you know, cleaning homes and
hotel rooms, um, uh, same, same again, agriculture work,
mining work, backbreaking work. So uh yes, sex work,
uh, is an option, uh, for folks that. You
know, it's a low barrier to entry. Um, IT'S
something that, you know, people can do, uh, anywhere,
so I understand why it is an option for
people that don't have many options, but there are
a lot of people with a lot of options
who are doing this work, and that is not
true for, uh, mining or agriculture, um, and you
know, there are people that are running community farms,
but I mean like backbreaking. Uh, THE agricultural work.
Yeah, it's also interesting that uh many of these
people also assume that uh in the particular case
of prostitution that they always have negative experiences interacting
with their clients and so on, and that's actually
not true at all. I mean, maybe some of
them do, but there's many, many sex workers out
there that say that they have very positive experiences
with their clients. That they don't feel they don't
feel abused nor anything like that. No,
it's, it's a mixed bag, you know, my, my
mother worked in, uh, in sales her whole life,
you know, so like, you know, the relationship and,
and sex work is a, is a sales job.
So, you know, customers can be annoying, uh, they
can be abusive, and they can also be incredible
and friendly. I mean, my mother is still, still
friends with people that she sold furniture to decades
ago. And so, you know, for me, I had
lovely experiences with clients. I had irritating experiences with
clients. I had a couple of like off-putting experiences,
one or two like scary experiences with clients, but
I experienced a lot more sexual violence in my
recreational dating life than I did as a paid
escort.
What about when they say that sex work objectifies
women? What do you think about that?
Uh, SOCIETY objectifies women and sex workers profit from
that.
Well, you know, it's funny because I interviewed Alice
Little and she told me, oh yeah, I am
objectified, so what? There's, there, there's positive ways of
being objectified. So that's what she told me. Yeah,
it's, yeah, I mean, it's, it look, again, it,
it I was objectified as a waitress. I was
objectified as a barista. Sex work was the only
job where I got to take some of that
power back and turn that into an advantage.
Yeah, should we worry about occupational health and safety
in sex work?
Absolutely, we should, we should worry about occupational safety
and health, um, across the board. I think that
like public health is a is a public concern,
but I don't think that we get there with
mandatory. STI tests or registries. I think we do
that by reducing barriers to access. I think that
STI testing should be free. Um, I think that,
uh, you know, it should be easy to get,
uh, treatment, um, and testing. You should be able
to tell your doctor the truth, whether the work
that you're doing. Is criminalized or not without fear
of repercussion or being outed, but we're really far
away from that future and so like we still
live in a world where where sex work is
criminalized, condoms are used as evidence against people. So
you know I think that we have a shared
interest in encouraging safer sex practices across the board
whether people are being paid for that or not,
but sex workers are definitely um. Even with criminalized
condoms, uh, sex workers on average, practice safer sex
than the hookup culture.
You know, all, all the, every time I watch
or listen to a debate between someone who is
against sex work and a sex worker. The debate
always goes the same direction. They always try to
come up with arguments to say or claim that
the sex worker must be a flawed woman or
some sort of damaged good, because if, if they're,
if they've not been victims of sexual abuse, they
must have had a bad relationship. With their fathers,
if not that they must do alcohol or drugs,
if not that they're probably addicted to sex, if
not that they don't just don't care about the
consequences and so on and so forth. I mean,
what do you think about that?
I mean, I think that the, the messier reality
that this sort of perpetual myth. Tries to kind
of paper over is that sexual violence is ubiquitous.
Most people have experienced some form of sexual violence,
and that's as true of nursing and teaching and
comedy and accounting and lawyers as it is in
sex work. So you meet a lot of sex
workers who have experienced sexual violence, but again. That
is not overrepresented. And so sex workers, sort of
very similar to the like formal BDSM community have
language around consent, negotiated consent, ongoing consent that is
sort of wholesale missing from most like vanilla or
mainstream sexual discourse, and so. You know, a lot
of sex workers talk about taking the power back,
right? They talk about how sex work allows them
a container for, uh, you know, their erotic energy
that feels safe and controlled and negotiated. Um, BECAUSE
the consequences of that energy in the world are
pretty violent. And so, you know, I'm not saying
that sexual violence isn't a problem, but prostitution and
pornography do not cause rape.
Yeah, but then there's also those sorts of claims
that conservative people make that, oh, pornography and sex
work cause sexual violence. Sex work impacts birth rates,
it negatively affects relationships. Sex work leads to social
decadence, porn addiction, I mean,
yeah, sure, I mean. I, I, I think that
argument would. Feel more persuasive to me if I
didn't know so many people who had never sold
sexual services that were victims of sexual violence or
and or sexual dysfunction, uh, who were deeply unhappy
in their relationship. Like, you know, sex workers are
not, uh, are not the only people or especially
women who are like suffering in this culture. It's
not a causal relationship.
Uh, I mean, the supposed relationship between pornography, for
example, and sexual violence, if anything, it would be
the other way around because it's like sexual violence
goes this way and porn conception goes the other
way over time. So if anything, watching more pornography
reduces the sexual,
and there's a lot of evidence to, to support
that and like there's also a lot of evidence.
To suggest that the availability of uh of sex
work or the like sort of easy making it
easier for people to do sex work reduces reduces
violence against women where Craigslist erotic services was available,
the female homicide rate dropped on average 17%. When
Rhode Island decriminalized indoor prostitution, reported rapes dropped 30%.
You see very similar numbers in places where, you
know, like online sex work becomes suddenly more available
or where like brothels become legal. There's actually an
inverse relationship between like the more sex work, the
more open and available and easier sex work is,
the less sexual violence there is. Now, there's a
couple of like causal relationships around that. I don't
like the argument that sex workers like absorb. The
sexual violence, right, like of men in our society,
I think it's a lot more complicated than that.
I think in part, like specifically the female homicide
rate with like Craigslist erotic services is that Craigslist
erotic services allowed women that would otherwise never consider
prostitution. To do prostitution in kind of a secret
way, like you could post an ad, it's free,
no one would know, meet somebody at a hotel
room. So this allowed people to get out of
acute abusive relationships. Before they were killed, like, so
sex work creates sort of an escape hatch for
violent relationships. Women have been using sex work to
get the money they need to flee for literally
all of human history. Before we had domestic violence
shelters, brothels often served that function in a society.
It was a place that desperate women could run
to.
You know, one of the funniest accusations I've ever
heard directed at sex work was a conservative religious
guy from Brazil having a debate with the Brazilian,
uh, OnlyFans content creator, and at a certain point
he said that sex work causes the collapse of.
Civilizations and I'm like, oh, OK, fine. So I
read, I read Jared Diamond's work and the work
of other people who studied the collapse of civilizations.
They talk about political corruption, economic inequality, overexploitation of
resources, uh, I mean natural disasters. Where's the sex
work? Sure,
I mean. What sex work does or like the
acceptance of like prostitution and promiscuity does is it
does cause the collapse of patriarchy. And if you
think patriarchy is civilization, then fine, yeah, it's hard
to have a patriarchy if you don't know who
the dads are heard, but I just don't think
that that's that important to a functioning, functioning civilization.
No, me neither. So let's get into uh. OK,
so how should we approach sex work legally and
politically? I mean, because there's full criminalization, partial criminalization,
the Nordic model, legalization and the criminalization. I mean,
what's the best
approach? I mean, sex workers all over the world
have been asking for the same thing. For generations,
which makes it, which makes it easy. We all
want decriminalization. We want to make it so that
people that do this work are not arrested, evicted,
fired, or lose custody of their children just for
engaging in this work because buying, selling, and facility.
Facilitating sexual services is not a crime. That's what
decriminalizing sex work means. Now, legalization or regulation, which
forces sex workers into brothels, this is what you
see in Nevada and Germany and Amsterdam, is a
legal model that does not increase the negotiating power
of sex workers. It's a model that really only
benefits brothel owners. The criminalization of clients or, you
know, third party folks like landlords or managers or
pimps, this is the model that you see in
Sweden and Norway. Everywhere that this policy has been
implemented, violence against sex workers goes up. And so
because we know what prohibition does to markets, we
know that you cannot criminalize half a transaction without
pushing it further underground. And when you specifically criminalize
clients, you, you undermine all of the safety strategies
that sex workers use to keep ourselves safe. So
that's the argument against the sort of end demand
approach that we have in the Nordic countries,
yes. Yes, and this is, yeah, this is, um,
it's unfortunately a policy that goes by many names,
uh, because when people understand what it is, they
see how dumb it is, so they just keep
changing the name. So it used to be called
the feminist model or the equality model or the
Nordic model or the Swedish model or the end
demand model or the John Law model or the
client criminalization model. Um, MOST recently I've heard partial
decriminalization, which is an infuriating. Framing of of this
law,
what does that mean exactly? I mean, what does
the argument in practice?
Yeah, so the argument that the prohibitionists are trying
to make is that it's partial decriminalization because you're
decriminalizing the seller, right, the sex worker, uh, while
criminalizing who they construe as the perpetrator, right, the
buyer, the pimps and johns. But of course in
practice. The, the, you know, sex worker faces a
lot of legal consequences, including eviction, uh, because renting
to a known sex worker becomes a crime under
this law. So, you know, when you're trying to
take someone's livelihood away, that's not often construed as
like helpful, so. Yeah, this is not a model
that sex workers want. It's not a model that
reduces violence, and it's not even a model that
reduces the amount of prostitution if that was a
goal, which I don't, I, I don't, I don't
think that's a good goal, but if that was
your goal, this policy doesn't achieve it.
Mhm. Um, AND I mean, what kinds of, er,
legal protections, if any, do you think sex workers
should have?
I mean, I think that sex workers should have
the same legal protections as anyone. I think we
should be able to report crimes committed against us.
I think that we should have access to like
banking and technology platforms that we all need to
move our lives forward. I think that we should,
uh, you know, have access to support and services,
um, and like I said earlier. I think that
we should be able to tell like our doctor
and social worker and the people in our lives,
uh, the truth about our work without fear of
arrest or, uh, losing our, you know, bank account,
social media, uh, like access to the internet, um,
and so those are the rights. I don't think
that sex workers are served. By, uh, putting ourselves
on a stigmatized list, so registration, licensing, mandatory brothels,
or legal schemes that sort of like try to
separate out sex workers from the rest of the
population, I think is a a a primrose path
uh to know we're good. If we lived in
a less whorephobic society. I maybe we could talk
about that, but we, but we don't. So, um,
yeah, I think it's really, really important not to
pursue laws that end up, uh, forcing sex workers
onto stigmatized lists.
Oh OK, so I have this question, I've been
talking with several sex workers, but this is still
not completely clear to me. So when it comes
to how we should deal with people who facilitate
er sex work or the selling of sex like
owners of. Brothels and pimps and so on, I
mean, which are the ones that perhaps we should,
or, or do you think that some of them
should be criminalized, like for example, uh, people, pimps
who force women into sex work in some way.
Yeah, I mean people that commit violent crimes should
be prosecuted for those violent crimes. But like, you
know, I've, I've worked as a waitress and I've
worked as an actress and so like managers exist
in both of those professions and they're, they're great
managers and they're shitty managers, but those jobs are,
are, you know, are necessary. They serve a purpose,
right? Like. You know, and it's very similar in
sex work, right? So like, you know, uh, managers
or like third party facilitators, whether they're like brothel
owners or people on the other end of a
phone line or like you can use the word
pimp, but it's like somebody who's facilitating, right? Somebody
who is like doing the work of advertising that
sexual services are available, doing. The like scheduling or
like the screening if that's a part of it,
um, that's real labor and so if you're able
to just like show up to a hotel room
and pay somebody either a percentage of like what
you earn or like a flat fee or how
there's nothing inherently wrong or exploitative about that. There's
definitely something wrong with getting pistol whipped over anything
so like. You know, if my restaurant manager took
me out back and beat me for any reason,
they should be arrested for that's a crime, but
it's not because they're a restaurant manager, it's because
they hit me. So we should be able to
hold people accountable, but we can't do that if
we conflate. Their job with violence because that allows
us to ignore the violence. So coercion is a
crime. Exploitation should be a crime. It isn't, but
it should be, you know, lying to people or
tricking them. You know that that's a crime. DRUGGING
people is a crime. Kidnapping people is a crime.
When buying, selling, and facilitating adult consensual sex workers
is not a crime, you can hold people accountable
for the crimes that they commit. Does it make
sense? Yeah,
mhm, yes, no, it makes perfect sense. What do
you think are perhaps some of the uh resources
that should be available and of course again, uh
we can't make this into something that is exclusive
to sex work. It should be also occur in
other kinds of occupations, but what do you think
are the resources that should. BE available to sex
workers who do not really want to be sex
workers and would like to have the opportunity to
live that occupation.
Sure, I mean, I think the same thing that
should be available to people that clean houses or
work in mines that also want to, want to
get out, so. Oh, I think that we should
have universal health care, housing, and childcare. I think
that we should create a floor right beneath which,
uh, nobody falls so that nobody is forced into,
um, into labor that is like absolutely soul sucking
for them. Um, I think that. Yeah, and that's
why like universal healthcare and universal childcare and like
housing is an anti-trafficking policy, right? Because it, it
increases the negotiating power of workers, right? It reduces
our desperation and desperate people do desperate things, um.
I think that, uh, you know, being able to
meet and connect with other people that do this
work and have left, um, it's so important for
sex workers to be able to share information with
each other, right? This is how we share, uh,
bad, bad date lists. This is how we share
tips and tricks to keep each other safe, but
it's also how we share information about, um, employers
that. That are friendly to hiring sex workers, um,
how we share, like, you know, connections for, um,
other opportunities or like how to pivot, uh, you
know, the skills that you developed as a, as
an OnlyFans model into, you know, a vanilla branding
and marketing job. Like there, there are those opportunities,
but only if sex workers are able to like
openly communicate with each other.
So, and again, uh, this will be my last
question, but again, as we've already talked about before,
this is not exclusive to sex work. There are
other kinds of trafficking out there in many other
areas, but are there any other specific measures that
should be in place to try to fight back
against sex trafficking?
I think I long for a future. Where survivors
of all kinds, but specifically survivors and victims of
sexual violence, can and do report crimes committed against
them because they're believed and supported. And I think
that that should be true for people that are
reporting sex crimes, whether they were paid or not.
Like, I don't think it matters if money was
exchanged. I think that we have a lot of
work to do as a society to help support.
OF sexual violence, and that is where our focus
ought to be, making it easier and more comfortable
for victims to come forward and helping to shape
what justice and support looks like for them.
Yeah, and that would be for both men and
women, right? And also because I, I think it's
also very important to uh keep in mind that
when we talk about sex workers, we are, uh,
usually focusing on women, but there's there's also male
sex workers.
People of all genders have always done this work
and also the conversation around it has become very
gendered, but yeah, you're absolutely right.
Mhm. OK, so Caitlin, I'm seeing that we're running
out of time here. So where can people find
you on the internet?
So, uh, you can follow Old Pros, um, online
at Oros, uh, online. Um, WE send out a
weekly newsletter. It's a roundup of sex worker rights
related news. I also host the oldest profession podcast
where every episode I do a deep dive into
a different sex worker from history. And I am
currently touring my show, also called The Oldest Profession,
where I cover 10,000 years of history from a
sex worker's perspective, and you can find all of
my upcoming dates at the oldestprofession.org.
You should also write a book about it, by
the way. Thank you so much. I appreciate that.
OK, so look, thank you so much. It's been
lovely to talk to you,
Ricardo, thank you so much for having me, and
I, um, I apologize coming to you, uh, uh,
like a, I don't know, a, a tired raccoon.
No.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Enlights Learning and
Development done differently. Check their website at enlights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters,
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Muller, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyaz Olaf,
Alex, Adam Cassel, Matthew Whittingbird, Arnaud Wolff, Tim Hollis,
Eric Elena, John Connors, Philip Forst Connolly. Then Dmitri
Robert Windegerru Inai Zu Mark Nevs, Colin Holbrookfield, Governor,
Michel Stormir, Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnun, Svergoras and
Hal Herzognun, Machael Jonathan Labran, John Yardston, and Samuel
Curric Hines, Mark Smith, John Ware, Tom Hammel, Sardusran,
David Sloan Wilson, Yasilla Dezaraujo Romain Roach, Diego Londono
Correa. Yannik Punteran Ruzmani, Charlotte Blis Nicole Barbaro, Adam
Hunt, Pavlostazevski, Alekbaka Madison, Gary G. Alman, Semov Zal
Adrian Yei Poltonin, John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward Hall,
Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franco Bartolati, Gabriel Pancortez or
Suliliski, Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sony Smith, and
Wisman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georg Jarno, Luke
Lovai, Georgios Theophannus, Chris Williamson, Peter Wolozin, David Williams,
Dio Costa, Anton Ericsson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie
Martinez, Coralli Chevalier, Bangalore atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior.
Old Eringbon. Esterri, Michael Bailey, then Spurber, Robert Grassy,
Zigoren, Jeff McMahon, Jake Zul, Barnabas Raddix, Mark Kempel,
Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Story, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin
Galbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brendan, Nicholas Carlson, Ismael Bensleyman.
George Ekoriati, Valentine Steinmann, Per Crawley, Kate von Goler,
Alexander Obert, Liam Dunaway, BR, Massoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular,
Jannaertner, Ursula Guinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsov, Sean Nelson,
Mike Levin, and Jos Necht. A special thanks to
my producers Iar Webb, Jim Frank Lucas Stink, Tom
Vanneden, Bernardine Curtis Dixon, Benedict Mueller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine
and Patrick Tobin, John Carlomon Negro, Al Nick Cortiz,
and Nick Golden, and to my executive producers, Matthew
Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanis, and Rosie. Thank you
for all.